In week two you have learned how to use
the optimization analytics tool kit,
how to setup an optimization model,
how to create a spreadsheet
implementation of your model, and how to
identify the best decision using software.
All the examples we looked at in week two
assumed that the data you have is certain,
and that the outcomes of any course of
action you choose are also certain.
In particular, for every decision we
considered, we knew exactly what its
financial impact would be and whether it
would satisfy all business requirements.
This week, we'll look at the settings
where the business environment contains
a substantial degree of uncertainty.
In environments like that,
a particular course of action
may lead to uncertain outcomes.
For example,
uncertain values of profit or cost.
How do we value it and compare
decisions when we do not know exactly
how they impact our profits or costs?
This is what we will
focus on in week three.
In particular, we will learn how to use
another important analytics tool kit,
simulation.
Mustering the optimization and
the simulation analytics tool kits will
prepare you for tackling complex business
decisions that involve choosing
the best alternative and uncertainty.
In week three we will have
three class sessions.
In session one we will discuss
how different high uncertainty
settings are from low uncertainty settings
when it comes to charting
the best course of action.
We will look at a specific example that
focuses on evaluating a wireless data
plan, and
discuss the notions of reward and
risk that play a central role in
decision making and uncertainty.
In session two, we will introduce
a simulation tool kit that we will use to
estimate measures of reward and risk when
making choices in uncertain environments.
We will look at how to set up
an algebraic model for a simulation,
how to implement it in a spreadsheet form,
and how to run a simulation model.
Finally, in session three we'll
focus on interpretation and
visualization of simulation results.
Let's start with session one.
One important feature of
low uncertainty settings,
is that each particular course of
action results in certain outcomes,
single values, rather than multi
value probability distributions.
Take Zooter example, if a company chooses
to produce 500 units of each scooter,
it knows exactly how much
profit it will make, and
how much of each resource it will consume.
Now, in high uncertainty settings,
the situation could be different.
Let's look again at the news
vendor example from week one.
Consider a product that sells for
12 talers per unit.
It costs three talers to produce
one unit of this product, and
all units that are not
sold cannot be salvaged.
In this case, as in many other settings,
decision on how many product q to put
on the market, must be made before
the demand for the product is known.
So, the overall profit,
which is the combination
of decision q and random demand d,
may also become random.
Let's start with random demand.
We can model the demand
using scenarios approach.
For example,
we can take historical demand values and
use those as possible scenarios for
the future, attaching the same probability
to each scenario, or
we can find a continuous
probability distribution that provides
the best fit for our historical data.
Whichever way we choose to
model the future demand,
its random nature may translate
into random profit values.
Let's look at an example.
Let's choose three data points from our
historical demand values, he first one,
29, the one from the middle,
63 and the last one observed, 41.
Let's say we put on the market
q equals 50 units of a product.
Let's calculate the profit we will
generate from each of those three
demand values.
If we have 50 products on the market,
and the demand happens to be 29,
our profit is $198,
as we produce 50 and
sell only 29 units of our product.
On the other hand,
if the demand turns out to be 63,
we sell all 50 units we produce,
and get a profit of 450 talers.
Now, if the demand turns out to be 41,
we generate a profit of 342 talers,
since we sell only 41 units
out of 50 we produce.
So, a certain decision today results
in an uncertain outcome tomorrow.
One q value can generate
three profit values
depending on what demand
value is realized.
So, let's compare the process of
selecting the best option in low and
in high uncertainty settings.
In low uncertainty settings, for each
combination of decision variables we must
calculate the value of the objective, and
determine the feasibility of the solution.
In other words, determine whether it
satisfies all problem constraints or not.
After that,
one must find the best feasible solution.
In contrast, in high uncertainty settings,
we must understand how to
calculate the distribution for
any key performance indicator,
profit, costs, etcetera.
So, if we want to choose the best option,
we must understand how to choose
one probability distribution, such as
the distribution of profit, over another.
We will look at how to generate
probability distributions of key
performance indicators such as profit,
cost, etcetera, in week three.
In week 4 you will learn how to use
these probability distributions
to make the best decisions.
Let's start our analysis of how to make
decisions in high uncertainty environments
by looking at an example.
Consider a business analytics consultant
that explores new options on
the wireless data plan for her family.
She's currently subscribed to a plan that
charges $10 for each gigabyte of data.
Now, she found an alternative plan,
and in this plan her family
gets 20 gigabytes of data every month for
$160.
In addition, for
data usage amounts above 20 gigabytes,
the new plan will charge $15 for
each gigabyte above 20.
For example, if monthly data usage
turns out to be 22 gigabytes,
then the plan will charge
a fixed fee of $160
plus 15 times $230 for
the two gigabytes of data above 20.
So the total monthly charge in this case
will be 160 plus 30, $190.
Consider another example.
Let's say that in a particular month,
the data usage is 17 Gigabytes.
Well, in that case,
our consultant will still pay $160.
The consultant is interested in the amount
she will have to pay on monthly basis
under this new plan.
Since the amount of monthly payment is
a function of monthly data usage, and
monthly data usage cannot be
predicted with certainty,
her monthly payment cannot be
predicted with certainty as well, but
she can use predictive analytic methods,
like the ones discussed in week one,
to convert the past data usage values
into a forecast for the future.
Let's suppose that our consultant, after
analyzing past monthly data usage values
for her family, came up with a prediction
model for the future data usage values.
Let's say this prediction model tells
her that her future monthly data usage
values will be distributed
as a normal random variable,
with mean of 23 gigabytes and
a standard deviation of five gigabytes.
Then, since under the current
plan she pays $10 per gigabyte,
she knows that her future monthly payments
under the old plan will be distributed as
a normal random variable with mean of
230 and a standard deviation of $50.
This is because when we multiple
a normally distributed random variable,
like the data usage u,
by a constant like 10,
the result is a new random variable with
the mean equal to the product of that
constant, and the mean value of
the old normal random variable,
and the standard deviation equal to
the product of that constant, and
the standard deviation of
that old random variable.
In our case,
if we multiply random data usage u by 10,
we get a normal random variable with
mean equal to 23 times 10, 230, and
the standard deviation of five times 10,
50.
In other words,
if our consultant keeps her old plan,
she knows the distribution
of her monthly payments.
So, we have a distribution of outcomes,
monthly payments, associated with
the decision to keep the old plan.
If we want to compare this
decision to any other decisions,
for example a decision to
subscribe to some other plan,
we must extract from this distribution of
outcomes some key performance indicators.
The idea is to then use one of these
performance indicators as an objective and
the rest is constraining factors when
choosing between different decisions.
So, what are those performance indicators?
Let's start with the so called reward.
Expected value of profit or
cost Is often used as a measure of
attractiveness of a particular decision.
In our example an expected monthly
payment is what consultant would
pay per month on average if she
stays with the plan forever.
In general the lower is the expected
payment under particular plan,
the more attractive this blend would be,
all other things being equal.
Note that the term reward
basically reflects the attractiveness
of a particular decision.
So, higher reward can mean
higher expected profit, but
it can also mean lower expected cost.
Now, expected payment is what
one get if calculates an average
monthly payment over
infinite number of months.
In any particular month,
the actual payment can be quite
different from the expected value.
So, for any decision we consider in
high uncertainty settings we must,
in addition to our reward measure,
have a key performance indicator or
indicators that tell us how
risky our decision can get.
One candidate for the measure of risk
in our wireless data plan example
is a standard deviation of
actual monthly payments.
The standard deviation tells us, roughly
speaking, how far away from the expected
value our actual payments in any
particular month will be on average.
A decision maker may prefer lower
values of the standard deviation
of monthly payments,
all other things being equal.
Now, a risk may mean different
things to different decision makers.
Some would like to control the value
of the standard deviation of monthly
payments, yet others may be concerned
about the likelihood that their payment,
in any given month, exceeds a particular
threshold, for example $300.
In other words, risk measures can
come in all shapes and sizes.
They can reflect multiple key performance
indicators that a particular decision
maker, a firm, a manager,
wants to keep track of and control.
So, here's a road map that we will
be charting when making decisions in
high uncertainty settings.
First, we'll decide which key
performance indicators we will select
as measures of reward and risk.
Then, we will use simulation to
get the estimates for reward and
risk measures, for all different
courses of action we consider.
Finally, we will use
optimization tool kit,
to select the best course of action using,
for example,
reward estimate as the objective function,
and risk measures as constraints.
Simulation tool kit is what we're
going to focus on next, and
the process of selecting the best
alternative based on the results of
simulation will be covered next week.
>> In this session, we have looked at
differences in the way a decision making
process unfolds in low uncertainty versus
high uncertainty business settings.
We have looked at the data
plan evaluation example and
identified performance measures,
broadly defined as reward and risk,
that will help us to evaluate and compare
decisions in high uncertainty settings.
Next time, we're going to look
at a simulation as a tool for
estimating the values of reward and risk,
for any course of action we choose.
See you in session two.